KINGSLEY:
In Cairo, a muezzin calls
faithful Muslims to prayer.
It's the same call that sounds
five times a day, every day
in cities across the world.
( muezzin continues calling )
Nearly a quarter of the people
on Earth respond to it
bound together by the enduring
spirit of Islam.
( muezzin continues calling )
"God is most great,"
the muezzin calls.
"I testify there is
no other god but God."
"I testify Muhammad is
the messenger of God."
"Come and pray...
"come and flourish.
"God is most great.
There is no god but God."
( muezzin finishes prayer )
In the unfolding of history,
Islamic civilization
has been one of humanity's
grandest achievements...
a worldwide power founded
simply on faith;
a spiritual revolution
that would shape the nations
of three continents
and launch an empire.
For the West, much
of the history of Islam
has been obscured behind a veil
of fear and misunderstanding.
Yet Islam's hidden history
is deeply and
surprisingly interwoven
with Western civilization.
It was Muslim scholars
who reclaimed the ancient wisdom
of the Greeks
while Europe languished
in the Dark Ages.
It was they who sowed the seeds
of the Renaissance
600 years before the birth
of Leonardo da Vinci.
From the way we heal the sick
to the numerals
we use for counting
cultures across the globe
have been shaped
by Islamic civilization.
But all this began with the life
of a single ordinary man.
And the profound message
he proclaimed
would change the world forever.
His name was Muhammad.
[Captioning sponsored
by VIEWERS LIKE YOU]
KINGSLEY:
To Muslims, the life of Muhammad
is a story revered.
In its mysteries as much
as its certainties
there are beliefs held sacred.
MAN:
Whatever we can tell about
the Prophet, of course
is screened through the filter
of what has been preserved
over the centuries
and what people
have wanted to preserve.
And it's very difficult
to pull out
from all of these different
sources that are very adoring
the ordinary human being that...
the... the person that he was.
KINGSLEY:
We do know that Muhammad
was born in or around 570 AD
in the sun-blasted
Arabian peninsula...
a land of savage scarcity
whose Bedouin tribes
were locked in a constant state
of tribal war.
While still an infant
Muhammad's parents gave him
his first taste
of life in the desert.
MAN:
Muhammad was from a town, Mecca
but he was sent off to live
with the Bedouin
because the people even
in the town of Mecca
felt that the Bedouin
were the holders
of the... the deeper
cultural Arab values.
And the Bedouin view
the townspeople
as having lost their really
authentic roots in Arab culture
and the poetry and...
and animal husbandry
and all the things that they...
they do so well.
( goat bleating )
KINGSLEY:
By the time Muhammad was six,
both of his parents had died
and he was taken under
the protection of his uncle
chief of his clan.
Being an outsider gave him
a singular perspective.
He'd been orphaned early
and developed very early on
a passionate sense of concern
for those who are
left out of society.
To be orphaned
in a tribal society
where clan and
family relationships
are your keys to everything--
success, status,
honor, dignity--
is... is to face what it really
feels like to be marginalized.
And that obviously had a...
a very deep impression on him
as a young man.
WOMAN:
In some ways it was
detrimental, of course
to grow up without parents
but in other ways
he was so adaptable.
He had many parents--
he had many fathers,
he had many mothers
so it made him a child
of everybody.
( bells tinkling )
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad's clan, like Arabs
all across the Arabian peninsula
would share the stories
that had been told and retold
for generations.
( man speaking Arabic )
MAN:
Pre-Islamic Arabian civilization
was largely an oral culture
and there was tremendous respect
for and admiration for people
who could express
themselves orally
and especially those
who could recite poetry
almost at the drop of a hat.
Some of the most important
people in a tribe were the poets
because they sang
of the glory of the tribe;
they... they told
the story of the tribe.
KINGSLEY:
To the Bedouin, the word
had a mystical importance.
Poets linked the tribe
to its ancestors
and celebrated values
older than memory.
Poetry was the sinew
that bound the Bedouin together
celebrating their victories,
lamenting their defeats.
SELLS:
The poems themselves
like the poems of Homer
both celebrate this heroic ethos
and yet intimate,
in the deepest way
the tragedy that this war--
this ethos of constant tribal
warfare brings to people.
KINGSLEY:
Warfare and conflict
were the grim realities
of a dangerous time.
Muhammad's uncle taught him
the skills he'd need to survive
in a world where even a prophet
would wield a bow and arrow.
In a wilderness punished by
the elements and bereft of water
rivalry over a single well
could provoke a blood feud
for generations.
ATIL:
A real rivalry, real battle
would have been sometimes
quite bloody
so the allegiance of individuals
was to the family, immediately
and, at a larger extent,
to the tribe.
KINGSLEY:
Without the tribe's protection,
no one could endure.
Scattered across the peninsula
were countless factions
all embroiled
in bitter struggles
each defending its precious
grazing lands, trade routes
and, most importantly,
its wells.
BLOOM:
Well, you have to understand
I mean, most
of the lands are dry
and so water is...
is something that's...
everyone always
considers precious.
SELLS:
For those of us in climates
that are more heavily watered
it's difficult to understand
the depth and the centrality
of the symbol of water
in societies that are desert
and in which it only rains
once or twice a year
and in which a little water
makes the difference
between life and death.
( drums beating,
metal clanking )
KINGSLEY:
Each clan had its own separate
gods and totems...
to water and wind,
fire and night.
They were kept in
the caravan town of Mecca
in a shrine of wood,
stone and cloth.
It was called the "Ka'bah,"
the Arabic word for cube.
RENARD:
Pre-Islamic Arabs worshipped
a number of spirits
and they were generally
nature-oriented spirits
sometimes associated
with natural... natural features
like trees or rocks or springs.
And the Ka'bah in Mecca was one
of a number of these sanctuaries
centered around a particular
cluster of deities.
KINGSLEY:
It was said the Hebrew patriarch
Abraham, himself
built the Ka'bah
centuries before
and that a sacred black stone
it held within
had fallen from the sky.
In these turbulent times
the Ka'bah provided
a rare place of peace.
Only here would the Bedouins
submit to a temporary truce
before returning to their
conflicts of the open sands.
There was this one place
in the middle, around the Ka'bah
which was, from
even pre-Islamic times...
was a place of...
a sacred enclosure
where all people had
to put down their arms.
And this, of course,
facilitated trading
because it meant that you
couldn't carry on your feuds
when you were doing
your buying and selling.
The spiritual
and economic importance
of the Ka'bah in Mecca
are pretty hard to separate
in... as far as the pre-Islamic
Arabs are concerned.
KINGSLEY:
The Ka'bah made Mecca
a vibrant center for trade.
Here were found Arabian incense
exotic perfumes
and Indian spices
Chinese silks
and Egyptian linens.
But perhaps the greatest
treasure to be found in Mecca
was the rich mixture
of cultures.
MAN:
There were people
who came through town
who had all kinds
of interesting experiences
to relate of faraway places.
The local religion was mixed.
There were Christians.
There were Jews.
And there were also
the Arabs of the desert
who followed an animist
type of religion.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad's world
was a center of trade
connecting the Mediterranean Sea
to the Indian Ocean
linking the aging empires
of Byzantium and Persia
to the great bazaars
of India and China.
Muhammad became a merchant.
In fact, he had
a great flair for trade.
At the age of 25, while leading
a caravan northward to Syria
his talents caught the eye
of the shipment's owner
a wealthy widow named Khadijah.
She was so taken with Muhammad,
she proposed marriage.
ATIL:
Ah, Khadijah.
Well, I think she was a mentor,
as well as a wife.
A very strong lady,
who had her own business
and Muhammad was
helping her out.
So it was a wonderful
partnership
and I'm sure he learned
a lot from her.
He had a tremendous
amount of contact
with merchants coming from
different parts of the world
passing through
the Arabian Peninsula.
I think he was
a very intelligent man,
very open-minded
and he was able to communicate
with a great variety of peoples.
He must have had
great charisma as well.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad had a way with people
and with resolving
their disputes.
Once, when the Ka'bah
fell into disrepair
the clan chieftains quarreled
over who would have the honor
of putting the sacred black
stone back where it belonged.
Before violence could erupt
Muhammad proposed
an equitable solution.
United in the effort
the four leaders shared
the weight and the honor.
In gratitude
they invited Muhammad himself
to replace the sacred stone.
He became known as
"al-Ameen, the Trusted One."
DENNY:
There are all kinds
of indications
that he was
tremendously interested
in religious questions.
This is obviously not something
that an ordinary person
probably was interested in
in those days.
He talked to sages...
Arab sages.
He talked to Jewish
and Christian sages
who lived in the area.
He used to go up into
the rock hills around Mecca
and meditate,
think about things.
And at some point,
had this extraordinary vision
which is spoken about
very evocatively and elusively.
KINGSLEY:
In a cave above Mecca,
Muhammad had
an experience that would be
the defining moment of his life.
An angel was said to appear
before him in the form of a man
instructing him to recite
in the name of God,
the Almighty.
For Muhammad,
it was an encounter
as profound as it
was deeply disturbing.
SELLS:
You get a sense
of what it would be like to be
a normal person in society
perhaps unusual in the sense
of your intensity for things
like social justice, and finding
out what the meaning of life is
but not being endowed
with anything that would seem
miraculous by your friends
and all of a sudden
having this voice come to you
and then come out of you
as you speak it and
recite it to other people.
And that is the beginning
of the prophetic career
of Muhammad.
KINGSLEY:
The months to come
would bring more revelations--
powerful words
of a lyrical quality
more beautiful than the most
exquisite Arabic poetry.
Above all, Muhammad was to bear
one message to his people:
a simple yet
radical proclamation
that there is only one God.
DENNY:
The central tenet of Islam
is the oneness,
the indivisible unity of God;
not something that is simply...
that one pays lip service to
but something that is absolutely
the most important concept.
Divine unity is more than saying
God is... there's only one God
and there are no other deities.
It's only thinking
about one thing.
So to be thinking
about possessions
to be thinking about status,
to be thinking about power
are all intellectual idols.
KINGSLEY:
The implications
were staggering.
One god meant one people.
No more tribal divisions.
To the poor and unprotected,
the prospect was revolutionary.
RENARD:
It seems to me
that one of the most important
things in his early teaching
that isn't often talked about
is the strong social justice
message that he delivered.
In the Mecca of the time, there
was an increasing separation
between the haves and have-nots.
He insisted that it...
this was not to be, and
that we should share the wealth
and it was this social justice
message that I think
that really got him a hearing
among many of the folks.
So coming with Islam, it was
a new order, a new way of life.
And it was a beautiful
way of life
because everybody was equal--
black, white, men,
women, children.
So it had that type
of universal appeal
which I think was the reason
why Islam spread so rapidly.
KINGSLEY:
Many were moved
by Muhammad's message
as he began to speak out
in the community.
SELLS:
It had
the suppleness
and symbolic depth
of the great Pre-Islamic poems
that had been created
by this people
and that had given
this people in Arabia
such an extraordinary ear
for verbal expression
where verbal expression was
the commanding cultural force.
Some people called him a poet
and there's a Qur'anic surah,
basically saying
Muhammad is not a poet.
Poets speak through desire.
This is not the voice of desire,
this is the voice of God.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad's following
began to grow.
They called themselves Muslims
for "those who
surrender to God."
They set out to preserve the
message Muhammad had brought.
This was the beginning
of the Qur'an.
BLOOM:
The Qur'an was revealed orally,
but very soon people realized
that it had to be written down
in order to make sure
that it wasn't corrupted
and that the original message
was maintained.
And from a very early date--
and it's very unclear
when that date was
because no early manuscripts
of the Qur'an survive--
people began copying it down.
KINGSLEY:
The Qur'an is a revelation
of the spiritual teaching
of both ethical
and social guidance.
It was revealed
and remains in Arabic.
SELLS:
What's so extraordinary about
the Qur'an is its naturalness
so that it can say the most
powerful cosmic things
with a sense of intimacy
so that power and tenderness
come together constantly
in the Qur'anic language.
With words alone
the Qur'an delivers
its vision to the faithful.
Its imagery conjures a picture
of the afterlife that resonates
with all the power of
traditional Bedouin poetry.
SELLS:
Imagine yourself in the desert
surrounded by dust
and by the glare of the sun.
You wear cloaks
to cover your body
because the wind will just sear
your skin right off your face.
And you walk into an oasis.
The temperature drops
dramatically.
There's a quiet there.
The wind is no longer howling.
Everywhere you look you see
green and color.
The world of water and paradise
are symbolically
tied to one another.
And the Qur'an conjured that up
with just a few
briefly chosen words.
KINGSLEY:
Yet for all the imagery
of Paradise in the Qur'an
there was no easy
description of God.
The mystery would remain.
SELLS:
It's very difficult to talk
about God without reifying God--
"reifying"-- to make God
into a thing;
or anthropomorphizing God--
to make God into a projection
of our own human self.
And that's why Muslims
don't like sculpture
for example, traditionally
because they believe
that there's that danger.
And the Qur'an avoids that by
constantly shifting the pronouns
so we can't really reify God
and get it... an image,
a physical image of God.
KINGSLEY:
Rather than a physical image
of God, or of Muhammad
it is the beauty
of the Qur'an itself
that is celebrated in Islam.
BLOOM:
Islam developed in this context
where pictures were not favored.
The Qur'an, as it was revealed
was God's
representation on earth
and Muslims felt,
from a very early time
that the only
just representation
of God... God's word
was the Qur'an itself
not any picture of...
of God, certainly not
because you couldn't
represent God
and certainly not
a picture of Muhammad
because he wasn't divine.
At certain times and places
people did make images
of the prophet Muhammad.
But these are not
religious images.
These are not images
meant to be worshipped.
They're not images
of a saint or of God.
They're images of Muhammad
as a historical figure.
He's sort of given honor
by having a very bright
blue background
or a white cloud near him.
But he's not otherwise
distinguished
from the other characters
in the story.
At other times, people did
represent the prophet
but he was always represented
with a white cloth over his face
to hide his face
so that there were different
approaches to doing this.
But in all of these,
these are not devotional images.
You're not supposed to look
at them and pray towards them.
You're to learn more about
the history of your religion
with the emphasis on history
from them.
KINGSLEY:
As Muhammad's community grew,
so did the opposition.
SELLS:
People, of course,
were skeptical and said
"Look, if you're a prophet,
where's your miracle?"
And the prophets in the Qur'an--
Moses had miracles,
Jesus had miracles.
"Where's your miracle?"
The Qur'anic answer
to that challenge
is "This is the miracle,
this Qur'an."
KINGSLEY:
But that wasn't miracle enough
for the people
who defined themselves
by the gods of their ancestors
and the totems of their tribe.
Their doubts increased.
The idea of life after death
appalled them.
SELLS:
So the Qur'an presents people
as really being skeptical:
"You mean to tell me
that after I die
"and my body has gone
back to the elements
"and I've been putrefied
"that I'm going to be put
back together again
and brought back to life?"
That... of any of
the messages in the Qur'an
that struck the people of Arabia
as being the most
hard to believe.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad also spoke of eternal
damnation for the unjust.
RENARD:
He used the language
of apocalyptic imagery
talking about the signs
of the ends of time;
When the mountains crumble;
When the skies are rolled up
like scrolls, then you will know
what responsibility you bear
for your actions.
There are references
to those who are unjust
going to the fire.
KINGSLEY:
To the nonbelievers, the divine
reckoning Muhammad invoked
was an outrage, his dismantling
of their heritage and customs
deeply unsettling.
DENNY:
It was a threat
a threat in several ways:
to their social order,
to their age-old traditions
and an economic threat
because of the importance
of the pilgrimage shrine
of the Ka'bah in Mecca.
KINGSLEY:
As Muhammad's following
increased
the social fabric of the
caravan city began to unravel.
Business suffered
as pilgrims and traders, worried
for their safety, left town.
The tribal leaders decided
Muhammad and his message
must be removed permanently.
RENARD:
They didn't want him
taking over.
They didn't want him horning in
on their control of the city.
They made things
very difficult for him
perhaps even plotted
his assassination.
They tried to keep him
away from the Ka'bah.
They did everything they could
to try to run him out of town.
KINGSLEY:
They demanded
that Muhammad's uncle remove
his clan's protection
from the prophet
which would clear the way
for his murder
without the threat
of retribution.
But his uncle refused.
The battle lines were drawn.
Nothing short of tribal war
would settle the conflict now.
SELLS:
Muhammad is clearly asked
to do extraordinary things:
to tell the Bedouin
to give up many of their notions
of multiple gods;
to give up their attachment
to their ancestors
and their tribal warfare
in the way they had--
things that would...
could and did make him
the object of scorn,
persecution and an attack.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad's followers
were forced from
the marketplace and starved.
Those without clan protection
were tortured and killed.
In 619 AD, Muhammad's wife,
Khadijah, died
and his uncle as well.
Gone were his first great love
and his only protector.
Here at last
was the opportunity his enemies
had been waiting for.
But in the lush oasis town
of Yathrib, north of Mecca
a refuge opens
to Muhammad and his people.
Clan rivalries had become
deadly in the town
and they desperately needed
a peacemaker.
RENARD:
They had heard that Muhammad was
a very trustworthy man.
They'd heard that he had
great arbitration skills.
And they thought
"We'll see if we can't get him
up here and help us out."
So they invited him.
KINGSLEY:
Muhammad agreed
to travel to Yathrib
and settle their disputes
in exchange for a safe refuge
for his people.
For Muhammad's followers,
leaving the place
of their ancestors,
their families and tribes
was the ultimate test
of devotion.
In doing so, they began
a new community, a new tribe.
For the first time, they were
bound together not by blood
but by faith.
In the course of
a single caravan journey
Islam marks its true beginnings.
Their journey is known
as the hijrah.
622 in the Christian calendar
marks the Muslim year one.
Muhammad's goal among
the people of Yathrib
was the same
as his larger mission:
to bring unity and peace
with his message.
SELLS:
He was asked to be
a Solomonic figure--
to mediate tensions between
tribes that seemed intractable.
KINGSLEY:
As his work succeeded,
the town would become known
as "the city of
the Prophet," Medina.
RENARD:
Muhammad's great task in Medina
was to try and bring together
these various groups
and to try and forge
a community of believers
in a way that would bring people
together in a sort a harmony.
KINGSLEY:
To the divided clans of Medina
Muhammad offered
a vision of solidarity.
But even as he spread
the word of Islam
he didn't challenge
the beliefs of other faiths.
BLOOM:
Islam sees itself
in relationship
to the earlier
revealed religions
of Judaism and Christianity
and treats them
as "people of the Book."
It believes that God had
revealed himself, his word
to mankind, many times--
to Moses, to Jesus,
for example-- and...
but each time,
people went astray.
SELLS:
Throughout the Qur'an
we have a sense of
the humanity of Muhammad
his humbleness as a person
and the extraordinary challenge
of the mission he was given
by this divine revelation.
KINGSLEY:
As the Muslim community grew
in Medina
a life of simple devotion
and ritual developed.
A freed Abyssinian slave,
named Bilal
was the first to call believers
to prayer at Muhammad's house.
( muezzin making
call to prayer )
KINGSLEY:
It was the first mosque.
SELLS:
The call to prayer has within it
the first Islamic pillar
which is the affirmation
of God's unity:
"La ilaha illa Allah"
that beautiful phrase,
which many Muslims chant
over and over in their mind
or vocally
to constantly remind themselves
of the unity of God
and the unity of what
we should focus on in our life.
La ilaha illa Allah!
Ashhadu inna
Muhammad rasul Allah!
DENNY:
Praying together
is a good thing.
It cements the idea of belonging
to a movement or a religion
to an organization,
to a community.
MUEZZIN:
Hayyu 'ala al-sala!
DENNY:
The result is
something very,
very powerful even... to watch
even for a nonbeliever or
someone from another religion.
We carry out physical gestures
of prayer in worship
that unify our body and our mind
and our soul
all at the same moment of bowing
and touching
our head to the ground
toward that exact center.
What could be
a more powerful symbol of unity?
KINGSLEY:
It's said that
while he was in Medina
Muhammad received a revelation
instructing those in prayer
to face in the direction
of the Ka'bah, in Mecca.
Though filled with pagan idols
it was still
the shrine of Abraham
the first believer
in the one true God.
But even as the Muslims
were praying toward Mecca
their enemies there
were rallying in force.
Their goal:
to wipe out the Muslims.
Muhammad's people
began to gather arms.
Though the Muslims prepared
as best they could
they were outnumbered
and outmatched.
They mustered a force
of only 313
mostly old men and boys,
with few weapons...
while the approaching Meccans
were heavily armed
and a thousand strong.
For years, Muhammad had tried
to bring Islam
to the people of Mecca
peacefully.
Now it was time to fight.
The Muslims faced
their own tribes--
brother fighting brother,
son against father.
Yet they came armed
with a powerful weapon:
a passionate belief
in their faith.
Muhammad's troops fought
with every confidence that
God's will was guiding them.
They fought three
very, very bloody battles.
At one point, the entire
young Muslim community
was right on the edge
of annihilation.
KINGSLEY:
For three years
the Muslim army held out
against staggering odds.
As word of the fighting spread
other Bedouin tribes saw God's
hand in Muhammad's victories.
One by one
the peoples of the desert
began to join in his struggle.
The Muslim army grew,
and the tide began to turn.
The Muslim forces advanced
to the outskirts of Mecca.
It was a furious siege that
lasted for nearly a month...
Until finally,
the city fell to Muhammad.
In 630 AD
the terrified people of Mecca
braced for the onslaught.
Muhammad's army was returning
home, now 10,000 strong.
The vanquished knew the terrible
fate that awaited them.
SELLS:
According to the modes
of tribal warfare
the Meccans could expect
a big revenge.
The men are usually killed.
Women and children
are sold into slavery.
There's little pity for
the loser in a tribal war.
Of course, that's standard
around the world.
KINGSLEY:
But Muhammad had a surprise
in store for the fallen city.
When Muhammad came into Mecca
and not only did not carry out
a bloody revenge
but actually embraced
the very Meccans who had
fought him for three years
and attempted to annihilate him
it was very shocking
to the people in his milieu.
So within the very founding
of the religion
one finds episodes
of great generosity
often extraordinary acts
of kindness and mercy.
KINGSLEY:
But not all of Mecca
escaped Muhammad's wrath.
( crowd ululating )
Flush with victory, his troops
marched straight to the Ka'bah.
Seven times
they circled the shrine
as those who had come
to seek its protection
appealed to their idols.
But it was not the pagan people
Muhammad had come to destroy.
It was their gods.
He raised his staff
and the tribal gods of his
ancestors smashed into dust.
SELLS:
When Muhammad entered Mecca
and entered the shrine
and destroyed the idols
of the shrine
this is of great cultural and
symbolic importance in Islam.
By breaking the idols
he was breaking apart
the tribal system
in which each tribe really had
its own independent deity.
This was shocking
to the Bedouin.
This was saying
"The gods of our fathers
are being destroyed.
"In some sense you're saying
"that our fathers themselves
were deluded.
"How can you say this
in a tradition
in which relationships to one's
father and tribe are primary?"
So this act of iconoclasm,
then, is seen
as an act of prophetic violence
that has just as much importance
in Islamic tradition
as Moses' breaking
of the tablets
when he saw the idolatry
of Mount Sinai
or Jesus' casting the
money-sellers out of the temple.
KINGSLEY:
The destruction of the idols
was a new beginning
a breaking from the past
and the creation
of a powerful new force.
Mecca was just the beginning.
One after another
the tribes of a nation were
summoned to the fold
and united
under the banner of Islam.
A worldwide community
of faith was begun
borne in an extraordinary
alignment
of history, personality
and conviction.
ATIL:
What Muhammad did was to bring
a sense of solidarity,
a sense of mission
and he united all these
separate segments
within the peninsula
from then on, moved eastward,
westward, northward, southward.
KINGSLEY:
The Muslims turned to the north
swept into present-day Lebanon
and Syria.
They continued west into Egypt
and quickly across North Africa
fortifying the coastline
of the Mediterranean.
Only the seas stopped them.
Its growth was so explosive
from 622, the year one
of the Islamic calendar.
Um, within 50 years
people whose father had been
camel herders
were now governing one of the
major empires in world history.
Within 200 years, it extended
from Spain to China.
KINGSLEY:
The Muslims absorbed
the Sasanian Empire of Iran
and two-thirds of the Christian
Byzantine Empire.
By now, the empire was larger
than Rome.
It stretched from Morocco
in the west
to the Indus River in the East
where the border
of India is today.
How had it happened
that so small an army
could conquer an area so large
so fast, so easily?
RENARD:
Islam's success in expanding
into the central Middle East
and across North Africa
was due in large part
because people were fed up
with previous regimes.
Well, the idea that Muslims
were going across the world
saying, "Convert or die," is
really not accurate, not at all.
But it didn't have a heavy hand;
they didn't rule
with a heavy hand.
They allowed
the conquered peoples
to maintain
their administrative structures.
They allowed the Christians
and the Jews
to maintain their religious law
and to be governed by them.
And so in many cases,
conquered peoples did not feel
the presence of the new regime
very heavily.
Certainly for individuals
who felt themselves
exploited or downtrodden
by an oppressive and even
sometimes parasitic priesthood
the idea of Islam being
a religion essentially free
from clergy
must have seemed
very attractive.
ATIL:
It's the times
that creates the movement
and sometimes the men.
The Roman Empire had collapsed;
the Byzantine Empire
wasn't strong enough.
There was a need
for a new vision
a new way of looking to life.
And I think what
happened at that time:
Muhammad's mission filled the
void that the societies wanted.
They really wanted some sort
of solidarity in their lives.
KINGSLEY:
The lessons of the Koran
so successful for the Muslims
in Medina and Mecca
were playing out
on a global scale.
As the conquest swept
through Syria
the Muslims held
their Friday prayers
in the Church of St. John
the Baptist in Damascus
allowing its Christian
congregation
to continue their services
on Sunday.
Side by side
the two faiths shared
the same building in peace.
As the Muslim community grew
they bought the old church
from the Christian congregation
and built a huge mosque
on the site.
With Byzantine artisans
they decorated it with golden
mosaics of an Islamic paradise.
The great mosque of Damascus
would become a model
for new mosques to come,
all across the empire.
The Arabs transformed
their conquered lands
maintaining, improving or
expanding the infrastructure.
In Tunisia, building
on Roman ruins
they devised an ingenious system
of water purification
using gravity to separate
freshwater from sediments.
BLOOM:
Part of this system were
these two enormous basins
that they built
outside the city walls
The clean freshwater would flow
over into the larger basin
where it would then be
distributed by pipes
to the city.
This is, you know,
hundreds of years
before anyone in Europe
ever thought
of having running water.
All over, you find schemes
for bringing water
from the mountains
where there was more water
to the plains
where there might be less water.
KINGSLEY:
They resurrected
elaborate irrigation systems
filling the old stone aqueducts
with precious water.
Agriculture flourished, as
life-giving staples like wheat
were introduced
to the Mediterranean region.
But Muslims saved
their most monumental feat
for the holy city of Jerusalem.
BLOOM:
Islam's first great work of art
is the Dome of the Rock.
It was built in a city that was
holy to Christians and Jews
and it's spectacular.
KINGSLEY:
Like Mecca and the Ka'bah
the significance of this holy
site goes back to Abraham
for the rock within
is said to be
the place he nearly
sacrificed his son.
It was built to rival the nearby
Church of the Holy Sepulcher
where Jesus was said
to have been buried.
BLOOM:
What's extraordinary
about the Dome of the Rock
is how perfect it is.
People revered this site
as someplace that was holy
to Abraham and to Isaac.
Imagine, if you will,
these new guys coming in
and taking over this piece
of prime real estate.
And building a new building
for a new religion
that sits on top of a mountain
and sparkles and glitters in the
sunlight for everyone to see.
This is not something
fly-by-night.
This is something big
and important.
Islam has come to stay.
KINGSLEY:
In just a hundred years
Muhammad's vision
had transformed
the spiritual and political map
of the world.
And his followers
had established
an empire larger than Rome.
But Muhammad never lived
to see it.
In the 11th year of the Islamic
calendar-- 632 AD--
only two years after the taking
of Mecca, Muhammad died.
( men shouting,
women ululating )
KINGSLEY:
Medina fell into despair
( women ululating,
men shouting )
KINGSLEY:
For days, the city was consumed
with sorrow and ceremony.
BLOOM:
He's known to have said that he
wanted to be buried very simply
with no marker over his grave.
He didn't want people
to worship his grave.
That would interfere
with their worship of God.
KINGSLEY:
God had spoken to them
only through Muhammad.
Now that the prophet
had left them
perhaps God would as well.
RENARD:
Muhammad's death set up a crisis
in the young Islamic community.
The question of succession
was the first thing
that really occupied
people's concerns.
At this point, there was
a divergence of opinion
as to how the community should
go about choosing a new leader.
According to the Shiites,
the faction-- the Shi'a-- of Ali
Muhammad had indeed
designated Ali
his son-in-law and cousin,
as his successor.
The opinion that came to be
the majority opinion
or the Sunni opinion
held that Muhammad had not
appointed a successor
during his life
but had said, "After I'm gone,
choose one from among your peers
from among the elders."
And from the house
there came out
the man who would be
his successor, Abu Bakr.
And he addressed the people
and said
"If you worship Muhammad,
know that he is dead.
If you worship God,
know that he lives forever."
KINGSLEY:
Here was the secret to Islam's
strength and profound influence:
the unifying power of one God--
merciful and compassionate--
the power of one people
bound by a common faith.
Muhammad did not lead
the conquest
or create the empire to come;
the transforming power
of his message did.
Out of that message would spring
a font of knowledge
that would transform humanity
as Islam continued to spread
its reach far and wide.
Awaiting the Muslims
would be a new age.
They would be destined
for enlightenment
for new horizons,
and a clash of great powers
the like of which
the world had never seen.
a powerful new faith was about
oto change the world--
the faith of Islam.
Its followers launched a
conquest not only by the sword
but with the power of ideas.
200 years after the death
of Muhammad
his message and the new Arab
Empire were transforming
three continents.
MAN:
Now comes a new empire
a politically new configuration
and driven by a religious,
newly defined civilization...
this new civilization expanding
beyond its own dreams
within a period
of very short time...
literally the largest empire
civilization had ever known.
[Captioning sponsored
by VIEWERS LIKE YOU]
KINGSLEY:
The Arabic word for conquest,
fath
literally means "openings."
Islam sowed the seeds
of its faith to the four winds
and a world of opportunities
opened before it.
But the vast empire's spiritual
core remained at its birthplace
the holy city of Mecca.
From every corner
of the Muslim world
the faithful embarked on the
traditional journey to Mecca
a sacred pilgrimage
known as the hajj.
RENARD:
The pilgrimage became a central
devotional and ritual feature
in Islamic life.
In fact, since the life
of Muhammad himself
the pilgrimage has symbolized
probably more than any other
Islamic ritual activity
unity among all people,
and equality.
KINGSLEY:
The hajj set humanity in motion.
For the first time since
the reign of Alexander the Great
cultures and caravans
now flowed freely.
Borders, closed for
a thousand years, opened.
WOMAN:
Both ideas and goods
went back and forth
over incredible distances.
Since every Muslim is enjoined
once in his life to visit Mecca
it means that there were
caravans carrying goods
and pilgrims and ideas
and people.
And they all met together
in Mecca once a year
and then things would radiate
back home.
So if there was an invention
that was discovered in Samarkand
it could be within the year that
it would be known in Cordova.
KINGSLEY:
Where pilgrims trod,
traders soon followed.
Muhammad himself had been a man
of commerce
and now the spread of his
message brought with it
the spread of trade
and the Islamic way of life.
Trade was incredibly important
in the Islamic world
simply because of its
geographical position.
It was, and still is, between
west... what we call the West
and what people always called
the East.
So it was a natural land bridge
connecting China to Europe.
KINGSLEY:
In only two centuries,
Islam had extended its reach
from Spain all the way
to the edge of India.
It took nearly a year to travel
from one end of the Arab Empire
to the other.
At its heart was a fabled city
of wealth.
It was called Baghdad.
The palaces of ancient Baghdad
have been lost
over the centuries
but in its glory it rivaled
ancient Athens or Rome.
It was a magnificent
architectural achievement
the pride of Islam in a new age.
One visitor left this account...
"All the exquisite neighborhoods
covered with parks
"gardens, villas
and beautiful promenades
"are filled with bazaars and
finely built mosques and baths.
They stretch for miles on both
sides of the glittering river."
But what made this
the greatest city of its time
was more than just
what met the eye;
it was the company it kept.
Scholars made Baghdad the jewel
of the world.
BLAIR:
Certainly from
the eighth century on
Baghdad was the center
of learning
in the Islamic world.
And all major innovations
either came from Baghdad
or quickly came to Baghdad
because the best people came
to Baghdad:
the best thinkers, the best
philosophers, the best artists.
KINGSLEY:
They came in search of answers
to pragmatic questions.
The empire's meteoric growth
had left its new leaders
overwhelmed.
They had staggering engineering
and logistical problems
to contend with.
Solving them would take
the greatest minds of the day.
SALIBA:
Under the new empire now
you are responsible
for public hygiene;
for the marketplace;
you are responsible
for goods being sold
in the marketplace.
All of those require some basic
elementary sciences.
This new civilization,
having a need for science
really stemmed from the need
to run that empire.
KINGSLEY:
The best minds rose to the call.
The finest were welcomed
at a center of scholarship
Baghdad's renowned
House of Wisdom.
It was a magnet for scholars
and intellectuals
who came and worked
in the academies.
There were public libraries
associated with the palace
and scholars came
from all over the empire.
And there were scholars
from Iran.
There were scholars
from Byzantium who came.
Some were Christian, some were
Muslim, some were Jews.
And all of these different sort
of threads of human knowledge
came together
in the city of Baghdad.
So the net effect of this is
that you've got
human individuals
from radically different
cultural traditions
being thrown into the same
crucible.
KINGSLEY:
The challenge that greeted
these scholars was daunting.
The great works of the ancients
had to be transformed
into a wholly new body
of knowledge.
Competition for jobs developed
within a new intellectual elite.
SALIBA:
And from there on
every single scientist is
competing for that job
and they were competing
among themselves
almost just in the same way
that modern bureaucrats
and modern academicians
will fight among themselves.
KINGSLEY:
Scholars were dispatched
across the empire
to locate as many ancient texts
as possible--
the first international
scientific venture in history.
Unlike their Christian
counterparts
Muslim thinkers saw no
insurmountable contradiction
between their faith and the laws
governing the natural world.
So they embraced Aristotle
and Plato--
writers the Christian Church
considered blasphemous.
SALIBA:
So this is the time
when we begin to see scientists,
bureaucrats, what have you
going and seeking
from whatever civilization
that had any sciences before:
be it the Greek, be it
the Indian, be it the Persian
and so on.
KINGSLEY:
From the Hindus came
mathematical concepts
that guide us today.
It was the scholars
of the House of Wisdom
who developed the system of
Arabic numerals, still in use.
It is they who translated
and transformed
the writings of the Greeks
and made a gift of them
to the modern Western world.
The Renaissance had its
beginnings in Baghdad.
KARAMUSTAFA:
They managed to assimilate
quite a lot
of the rich legacy
of the Hellenistic world
translated into Arabic,
initially
which was then made available
to all other participants
in the new Islamic civilization.
Arabic emerges as the language
of learning
throughout the region.
This is a very significant
development
in human intellectual history.
KINGSLEY:
Having amassed the knowledge
the Muslims now began
to challenge it.
This was perhaps their most
important contribution.
The scientific process was born.
SALIBA:
They wanted to know why a very
intelligent Greek scientist--
whose text they
were just admiring
and they were verifying it--
why would he make a mistake
in the first place?
So they began to dig.
Was it because he didn't have
the right instruments?
Or is it because he didn't have
the right methodology
to use the instruments
for the verifications
of observation?
It is this spirit, you see,
this spirit of questioning
this spirit of saying that we
have to build science constantly
on a systematic,
consistent basis
where we make
a physical proposition
of how the universe
ought to be run
and the mathematical
representation
of that physical universe
ought to match.
Now you begin to have
what I call the birth
of the new Islamic science.
KINGSLEY:
Algebra and trigonometry,
engineering and astronomy.
Countless disciplines
integral to our lives today
trace their roots
to Islamic scientists.
More surprising, perhaps, were
their innovations in medicine.
At a time when Europeans
were praying
to the bones of their saints
to cure their illnesses
Muslim physicians developed
an innovative theory:
that disease was transmitted
through tiny
airborne organisms--
the precursor to the study
of germs.
They determined that sick
patients should be quarantined
and then treated.
This is the basis
of the institution
most fundamental to medicine
today-- the hospital.
Funded mainly
through religious endowments
Muslim hospitals
had separate wards
for patients suffering
from different kinds of disease.
Even mental illness was treated.
Their studies of anatomy
were so sophisticated
that they remained in use
by Muslim and European
physicians for 600 years.
Muslim scientists were
especially intrigued
by light, lenses and the
physiology of the human eye.
The father of optics was
a Muslim named Ibn Al-Haitham.
His work with lenses
eventually led
to the invention
of the modern camera.
He produced the first treatise
that ventured to explain
how the eye actually sees.
A thousand years before the West
dared to take up the practice
Muslim doctors were removing
cataracts surgically
clearing them from the eye
with a hollow needle.
But for all this knowledge
to transform
and illuminate an empire
it had to be copied and shared
across a hundred different
cities in the Islamic world.
For this there was
a new invention
one that is still fundamental to
learning and knowledge today...
paper.
BLOOM:
Around the year 700, 750
when Muslim armies reached
central Asia
they encountered paper
for the first time
and very quickly the Muslim
bureaucracy started using paper.
You find that, you know,
within 50 years, it's in Syria
and then a few years after that,
it's in Egypt.
And then it's in North Africa
and then it's in Sicily
and then it's in Spain.
And that's where Europe learned
to make paper from;
they learned to make it
from the Arabs.
KARAMUSTAFA:
We begin to have people with
family names like "Papermaker"
so, in other words, not only
that paper was available
it must have become a very,
very widespread industry.
And, hence,
the acquisition of books
must have also become very easy.
KINGSLEY:
With the wide use
of books and paper
hundreds of scribes,
some of whom were women
were kept busy transcribing
the translations
and new writings
of the Baghdad scholars.
BLOOM:
All of this knowledge that's
being acquired from the Greeks
and from the Indians and
from Central Asia and such
is all being written down,
in books, on paper
and that these books
are being copied
and recopied and sent around.
We know, for example, that there
was a street of booksellers
with more than 100 shops
each one with paper
and books for sale.
And this is a time when,
you know, in Europe
a monastery would be lucky
if it had five or ten books.
KINGSLEY:
While the monks of the West
were hoarding their wisdom on
scraps of expensive parchment
paper enabled
Islamic civilization
to spread its newfound
knowledge far and wide
creating a single community
linking three continents.
KARAMUSTAFA:
So, the chief distinction,
therefore
of Islamic civilization
in addition to the fact that it
made new leaps of originality
new transformations
in traditions of learning
and... and everything
else possible
is the fact that it
enabled human beings
to consider the possibility
of thinking about the globe
as a single unit--
humanity.
KINGSLEY:
In all the broad empire
there was one place
the Christian world
could experience the lifestyle
Muslims now took for granted--
southern Spain.
Here, on the European
continent itself
Islamic culture would begin
to have an effect
on the European civilization
around it.
A thousand years ago,
the Spanish city of Córdoba
was a center of learning and
culture that rivaled Baghdad.
Today, Córdoba's narrow lanes
hearken to its medieval past.
During the Dark Ages
this was the most prosperous
and sophisticated metropolis
on the continent.
It had streetlights
and paved roads;
libraries, hospitals
and palaces.
This was a city of light,
a Muslim city.
BLAIR:
The city of Córdoba in the ninth
and tenth centuries
was one of the biggest
and most exciting in Europe.
We have descriptions of it
by people coming and saying
"All these flowers everywhere.
"This... this open streets.
This... this wonderful light
coming down."
Northern cities were dark.
Córdoba had running water.
People lived in big houses.
In contrast, in Paris
people lived in shacks
by the side of the river.
KINGSLEY:
The glory of medieval Córdoba
is here
in what is now the great
Roman Catholic cathedral
in the middle of town.
But the Córdoba cathedral of
today began its life as a mosque
one of the grandest
of the Islamic empire.
BLAIR:
The Great Mosque in Córdoba
was simply the biggest mosque
in the biggest city
in southern Europe.
RENARD:
When you climb up
into the church tower
which used to be a minaret
and you look out
over this expanse of roof
it's quite amazing
to see this cathedral
complete with flying buttresses
popping up out of this... the
middle of this massive mosque.
WOMAN:
Many, many people
came to visit it
to view the wonders of the
mosque, which had rib-vaulting--
the kind of vaulting
which is like this
and which, 100 years later--
by a mere coincidence,
you might think
but not at all a coincidence--
appears in the Gothic cathedrals
of northern Europe;
in Lincoln Cathedral,
in Chartres Cathedral in France.
Where does that come from?
Obviously, influenced by
the Great Mosque of Córdoba
in the south of Spain.
KINGSLEY:
For the occasional
European Christian traveler
Córdoba was their
one opportunity
to glimpse the Islamic world.
What they saw was shocking.
Most of Europe at that time
languished in poverty
and squalor.
Córdoba was a pageant of
prosperity and enlightenment.
HILLENBRAND:
In the tenth century
there was a Saxon nun
with the unpronounceable
name of Hroswitha
who called medieval Córdoba
"the ornament of the world."
She was very, very taken
with the place
and there you are,
she's a Christian nun.
KINGSLEY:
As Europeans made their way
from the cold stone
of their northern castles
into the glorious Muslim cities
of southern Spain
they couldn't help
but be impressed.
In the green hills above Granada
was a palace
of startling elegance--
a shining example of the
richness and sophistication
Islam brought
to medieval Europe.
It is called the Alhambra.
BLOOM:
The Alhambra is perhaps
the most famous example
of Islamic architecture
to... to most Westerners.
It is the... the best
remaining example
of what a medieval Muslim palace
would have looked like.
KINGSLEY:
Echoed in the finely carved
geometric plasterwork
and marble pillars
is a vanished lifestyle
of extraordinary luxury.
The Alhambra reveals
the pinnacle of Islamic culture
and urbanity.
BLOOM:
The beauty of the Alhambra
is not so much in
the individual details.
No, it's more the combination
of everything.
That is, this wonderful,
sort of orchestrated interplay
of different textures
and surfaces;
of light and space
and water playing inside
and outside the building.
It's almost like a symphony
of different elements
that are very carefully
brought together
to provide exquisite enjoyment.
KINGSLEY:
Here, the Muslim elite
relished the good life.
Reposing on lush carpets,
surrounded by perfume and music
the privileged few
debated the nature of God
the subtleties
of Greek philosophy
or the most recent mathematical
revelations from India
while they dined
on spiced delicacies
served on Chinese porcelains.
They strolled the grounds
through gardens
irrigated by complex
gravity-fed water systems.
How far Muhammad's
followers had come
from the life of desert nomads.
How distant they felt
from the rest of the European
continent they now shared.
Christian Europe, due north
was struggling on
through the Dark Ages.
But at the dawn
of the 11th century
a tragedy in Jerusalem would put
Muslims and European Christians
on a collision course.
Jerusalem was ruled
by an Egyptian caliph
an infamous man named al-Hakim.
DENNY:
Al-Hakim was certainly
a deviation from the norm.
Clinically speaking,
I suppose today
we'd regard him as a madman--
as someone who
was simply insane.
KINGSLEY:
For 200 years, Christian
holy places in Jerusalem
had been respected and protected
by Muslim rulers.
In 1009, the Egyptian ruler,
al-Hakim
broke with that tradition.
He ordered the holiest church
in Christendom destroyed.
HILLENBRAND:
And, horror of horrors
he burned down the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.
Now, nobody knows
quite why he did it
and you can have your own
theories about it
but the fact of the matter
was that that sent shivers
of terror and anxiety
through Christendom.
In a way, of course,
al-Hakim was the one exception
that proved the rule
for Christians
that Christians had been
speaking of for centuries
of Muslims as intolerant,
mad, slavering heretics
who simply could not be expected
to abide by the rules
of civilized human beings.
HILLENBRAND:
The fact that
al-Hakim's successor
rebuilt the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre--
it was done by 1048
with Byzantine help--
didn't cut any ice.
There was this perception now
that things were not going well
in the Holy Land.
KINGSLEY:
In Europe, anti-Muslim
sentiment simmered.
By 1095, it reached
the boiling point.
Pope Urban II spent most of that
year traveling through France
imploring his feudal lords
to unite in a campaign
of bloodshed.
"Hasten to exterminate
this vile race
from the lands of your Eastern
brethren," the Pope demanded.
"Jerusalem is the navel
of the world.
"She cries out to be liberated.
Christ himself commands it."
HILLENBRAND:
So we've got a merging
or a coming together
of military service and religion
which served the purposes,
if you like
of a Pope who, in 1095,
made his famous call to crusade;
to rescue the endangered
holy places in the East
and, in particular, Jerusalem.
KINGSLEY:
In 1097, Muslim shepherds in
Syria caught their first glimpse
of a sight that would
soon strike terror
throughout the Holy Land.
When the crusaders struck,
by sheer chance
the Arab Empire was
at its most vulnerable
broken into feuding kingdoms
and petty dynasties.
HILLENBRAND:
They couldn't have chosen
a better moment
because the Muslim world was
in a very fragmented state.
The... the great rulers
of the time had died
and into that power vacuum
there came this most
unexpected enemy--
the crusaders
from Western Europe.
Who would have thought
that a new enemy
would come to the Islamic world
from that unexpected quarter?
It was completely unprecedented.
It was a real surprise.
The Muslims didn't really know
who they were.
They thought they were just
another lot of Byzantines
who were coming, as usual,
to be a nuisance
and fight on the borders.
They had no idea that there was
this extraordinary surge
of religious fervor
and fanaticism
coming from Western Europe
and that the aim of this group
was Jerusalem.
( screaming )
KINGSLEY:
History is haunted by days
of incomprehensible horror.
Few are darker
than July 15, 1099
when the crusaders
entered Jerusalem.
HILLENBRAND:
The massacre
must have been terrible.
The... the, the fear...
The fleeing of the population...
It must have been horrendous.
KINGSLEY:
From a letter to the Pope
from the crusaders:
"If you want to know
what was done
"to the enemies
we found in the city, know this:
"Our men rode
in the blood of the Saracens
up to the knees
of their horses."
HILLENBRAND:
They saw the holy city
and they were in a state
of exultation.
And perhaps that's why
when they flooded through
the gates of the city
that they were fired up
with fanaticism and zeal
and that's why there was
this terrible massacre
in the name of Christendom.
It was a blot on the name of
Christendom in the Muslim view
and justifiably so.
KINGSLEY:
Even Christians weren't spared.
At the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre
dozens of worshipers from
Eastern sects were massacred.
To the crusaders, they were
nothing more than foreigners.
The Christian chronicles
record the carnage.
"The Saracens
who were still alive
dragged the dead ones out
and made huge piles of them."
"Such a slaughter of pagans no
one has ever seen or heard of.
The pyres they made
were like pyramids."
HILLENBRAND:
They shocked the Muslim world
when they came.
There are a number of extremely
moving lamentations in poetry
which date from that period.
And the Arab poets of the time
talk about the feelings
of anguish and terror
which the crusaders-- or
the Franks, as they're called
in the Arab sources--
caused the local people
the old women, the young girls
those who are cloistered away
in their houses
are trembling with fear.
The whole imagery
is that of the rape
of their land
and the, um...
terrible impurities
caused by
these barbarian infidels
coming into their sacred space.
KINGSLEY:
"We have mingled blood
with flowing tears
"and there is no room
left in us for pity.
"To shed tears
is man's worst weapon
"when the swords stir up
the embers of war
"when blood has been spilt,
when sweet girls must hide
their lovely faces in their
hands for shame."
The First Crusade was over.
Of the 100,000 men
who began the campaign
most would eventually
return to Europe
having had only a glimpse
of Muslim life.
The job of occupying Jerusalem
and the surrounding countryside
fell to the 20,000
who remained... indefinitely.
To secure their occupation,
the intruders did here
what they had done in Europe,
they built castles.
HILLENBRAND:
The crusaders built
the finest castles
that the Near East has ever seen
and the proof of that
is that they're still there.
When everything else
may have faded away
the crusader castles
remain a living testimony
to their presence.
And Krak des Chevaliers
in Syria
is the crusader castle
of them all.
It's very, very big.
It's strong...
it's impenetrable.
It's a living example
of the way that a number
of the crusader castles
couldn't be taken by siege.
BLOOM:
You can see for miles and miles
from it
and see the other castles
that would have been, you know
in visual distance
for communication
by fire and smoke signals.
It's got, you know
all the accoutrements
of a good medieval castle
with battlements and turrets
and places for pouring
boiling oil and other liquids
down onto the enemy.
HILLENBRAND:
But inside that castle,
what was life really like?
It wasn't merriment
and festivity;
it was constant fear.
You had to be on the lookout
in case someone
was trying to mine the castle
or to climb over the walls
with scaling ladders.
The people outside--
the population,
the local peasantry--
they were not, uh, friendly
so you had to watch
their movements all the time.
It was a... a terrifying place.
KINGSLEY:
The crusaders made treaties
and broke them.
They harassed the traders
who passed by their castles.
As they raided caravans
the crusaders learned
of a luxurious lifestyle
unheard of in Europe.
Well, materially the crusaders
were just blown away
by what they found
in the Middle East
and they took a lot of it
back with them.
Inlaid metalwork,
uh, textiles, silks
things like that
they had just never seen
in such quantities before--
the good life.
These things they brought back
to Europe, some as souvenirs...
And, in fact,
there was a whole industry
that developed
in the Middle East
of providing souvenirs
for the crusaders to take back.
KINGSLEY:
It is, perhaps, a Western bias
to imagine the crusaders were
a decisive force in world events
devastating to the Islamic
culture and trade.
The truth is, while
the knights of the crusades
were bunkering down
in their castles
Islam was spreading its
influence and flourishing.
Muhammad's message rang out
as clear and strong
as it ever had.
( calling people to prayer )
KINGSLEY:
Mosques were now
on every horizon.
They welcomed traders.
They housed schools
and hospitals.
Through Islamic architecture.
literature and music
a vibrant culture was emerging
in celebration
of a singular faith.
( man singing Islamic prayer )
KINGSLEY:
Faith had launched an empire.
Culture was now enlightening it.
But ultimately what united it
was trade.
For the Muslims, trade, like
science, brought innovation.
Business was expedited
by a revolutionary concept
called the akk, a check
that could be written in Spain
and cashed in India.
Writing a check assumes that
someone's going to honor it
and cash it at the other end
and that if you give the money
or you have the money
in one place
that someone will say, "I have
access to that somewhere else."
So this implies that you have
some kind of central bank
or central loan organization
who's going to be
good for the money.
So it frees up your ability
to travel.
It frees up commerce
because, again, the money
doesn't have to be moved
from Samarkand back to Córdoba
in order to go back the other
way the next year.
So that you can base it all
on trust and faith.
And Muslims became
some of the greatest merchants
of the Middle Ages.
KINGSLEY:
And the greatest craftsmen
as well.
From the Persians,
Muslim blacksmiths learned
how to fold steel to give it
strength and flexibility.
The swords made
in Toledo and Damascus
had no equal in the world.
But the economic backbone
of Islam's expanding wealth
was textiles.
The demand for the products
of Muslim looms was enormous--
for cashmere, cotton and silk.
BLAIR:
Textiles were simply
the gas and steel industry
of medieval times
because you have
to think of textiles
not only as growing the plants,
but making all the dyes
and it was the dyes that
were particularly expensive
and imported the farthest.
And then you need all
the fixtures and mordants
and, uh, equipment for looms.
And then you need
to transport these textiles.
So, collectively
the industry of making
and transporting textiles
was the mainstay of the economy.
KINGSLEY:
While Europeans settled for
coarse woolen and linen garments
Muslims wore brocaded fabrics
of organdy, damask and taffeta--
words that came into
the English language
from Arabic and Persian.
The fabrics that were produced
in the Islamic world
were among
the finest ever produced
and they were made of not only
plain linen or cotton
but also very,
very fancy silks...
um, cloth of gold where silk
thread is wrapped with gold
and with very,
very complicated patterns.
KINGSLEY:
These complex patterns were
coveted by wealthy Europeans
and the church as well.
When the Christians
needed a cloth
worthy of wrapping
the bones of their saints
the choice was obvious;
they looked to a Muslim loom.
But sometimes the fabrics
were trimmed
with decorative Arabic texts
from the holy Qur'an.
And so the words of the prophet
sometimes appeared
in shocking proximity
to Christendom's holiest icons.
It is not unusual to find
in Italian Renaissance
paintings, for example
to find paintings of the Virgin
wearing a robe
of very fancy patterned cloth
and precious silks
embroidered with gold,
or woven with gold designs.
Sometimes they would say things
with an Arabic inscription on it
which says,
"There is no God but God;
Muhammad is his prophet,"
in Arabic.
KINGSLEY:
After almost 100 years of broken
treaties and sporadic fighting
the Muslims reached
a turning point
in their struggles
against the crusaders.
It came in the person
of one of Islam's most
celebrated figures.
His name was Salah Ad-din.
But the West would remember him
and come to revere him
as Saladin.
DENNY:
There is certainly one thing
that we must recognize
about Saladin
and that is
that he was successful
where many others of his faith
and of his part of the world
had not been;
that he possessed
one unusual feature:
In addition to his intelligence
and his robust physical strength
he certainly seems to have been
a great inspirer
of his military followers.
KINGSLEY:
In 1187, Saladin amassed an army
of 12,000 mounted warriors
and lured the crusaders
out of Jerusalem
onto a plain between two hills
called the "Horns of Hattin."
On the evening of July 3,
after a long march
the crusaders camped
on a barren hillside.
There was nothing
but a waterless terrain
and we're talking about July...
We're talking
about the Middle East.
We're talking about
incredible heat and no water.
KINGSLEY:
As dawn approached, Saladin's
men set fire to the tall grass
and a strong wind carried
the flames
into the Christian encampment.
And very soon, they found
themselves surrounded--
as in the Muslim tactic--
by their enemy
and panic set in.
KINGSLEY:
"The flames bore down on them,
and the heat became intense"
Saladin's secretary wrote.
"The people of the Trinity were
consumed by the fire of flames
the fire of thirst,
and the fire of arrows."
The army of the crusaders
was totally decimated
and the victory at Hattin was a
real turning point for Saladin.
It meant
that he could then proceed
to take Jerusalem
later on that year.
KINGSLEY:
Three months later,
Saladin entered Jerusalem.
For the first time
in almost a century
the call to prayer floated
over the Holy City once again.
( muezzin calling
people to prayer )
And yet, remarkably,
Saladin levels no retaliation
against Christians
or their holy places.
In the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre
mass was celebrated as usual.
Saladin also decreed
that Christians who wished to
could leave the city
with their property.
Those who chose to stay would
be allowed to worship freely.
HILLENBRAND:
When his reputation reached
Western Europe--
of the way he had behaved
in Jerusalem over the conquest--
he gradually became the most
famous Muslim of all time.
KINGSLEY:
Saladin's victory
did not put an end
to Western aspirations
in the Near East.
Other crusades would follow
though, as with the first,
they would hardly have an impact
on the larger Islamic culture.
The crusaders would
eventually be driven
from their citadels
along the coast
and return to Europe
their only lasting legacy
a few abandoned castles.
But the returning crusaders
found themselves changed
by their contact
with Islamic culture.
The long-term impact on European
life would be profound.
BLOOM:
They were just amazed
by the material culture
that they found there.
I mean, the quality
of the merchandise
the quality of the goods,
was far better
than anything
they could find at home.
And they brought it home
with them.
HILLENBRAND:
They came back, for example
with a taste
for highly spiced food.
They imported pepper
and cinnamon
and other oriental spices
because their taste buds
had been whetted
by a different cuisine.
We know that they found out
the delights of using soap
when they were
in the Middle East
and it would appear that
that caught on back in Europe.
After the crusades
many Europeans
were far more open to the ideas
of what was going on to the East
what was happening
in other parts of the world.
They simply couldn't be
as insular as before.
Lots of people were open to...
well, what's out there?
Let's explore this,
let's see this...
new intellectual thoughts...
Let's see what these people
are writing.
Let's learn languages.
This is when people start
to learn Arabic...
slowly, in the West.
KINGSLEY:
As the barrier
of language dissolved
ideas born
in the great Muslim cities
began to filter into Europe
ideas that would forever
change Western thought.
The great Italian theologian
Thomas Aquinas
used the writings of
the Muslim philosopher Averroes
to justify the clear separation
of faith and reason
a Muslim ideal that formed the
basis of all scientific inquiry
and led
to the European Renaissance.
Averroes himself appears
in Raphael's
classic Renaissance painting
of great Western thinkers.
Here, alongside Plato
and Aristotle
stands a vivid reminder of
the debt the world owes Islam.
The scope
of Islamic civilization
has now reached levels
which certainly
were not accomplished
by any other civilization,
known civilization of the world.
It actually unified parts
of our globe
in ways that had not
been witnessed before.
KINGSLEY:
But this golden age
of Islam was not to last.
After shrugging off the crusades
and bringing the precious gift
of knowledge to Europe
the great cities of the Islamic
Empire would be brought to ruin
by a force more terrible
than anything the Europeans
could muster.
Their libraries destroyed,
the wealth plundered
the empty cities stood mute
in the aftermath
of a devastation
that descended upon them
not from the West,
but from the East.
It's known
as the Mongol catastrophe.
The Mongols
were Turko-Mongolian nomads
from the steppes
of central Asia.
In the 13th century, they
rampaged across much of Eurasia
between the Ukraine and China.
It wasn't long before
they entered Islamic Persia.
BLAIR:
To the cultured, urban Muslims
these guys were
a bunch of savages.
When you entered the Mongol army
you came with yourself
and three horses
and you lived off the horses.
First, you drank their blood
and then,
when you moved far enough away
you killed them,
you slaughtered them
and you ate their meat.
And that's why they could go
so far and survive so long.
KINGSLEY:
Terror was
the Mongols' principal tactic.
BLAIR:
One of the local Iranian leaders
foolishly decides
to kill off the emissary
that the Mongols have sent
and in doing that, he evokes
the anger of the Mongols
who want to use him
as an example.
And they use this
retaliatory technique often
of killing off entire towns,
wiping them out as examples.
And so they build
these fantastic towers of skulls
where they pile up all the dead
bodies as an example
and then all the other towns
around immediately give way.
KINGSLEY:
City after city fell
before them.
It was only a matter of time
before they reached
the center of Islamic power.
On February 10, 1258,
the Mongols took Baghdad.
According
to the Arab chroniclers
the Mongols put Baghdad
to the torch
and killed 10,000 inhabitants.
Mosques and libraries
the collected knowledge
of centuries
were all set ablaze.
Within less than 50 years
the Mongols seized
the heart of the Islamic empire
from the Arabs.
Islamic civilization seemed
poised for destruction
lost to posterity.
But then
something remarkable happened.
While the consensus of opinion
is that Mongols
were a devastating force
I personally feel
that they also had
a very positive effect
on western Asia
and the world of Islam.
They opened
the world tremendously.
( muezzin calling
people to prayer )
And historically
the most significant thing
about the Mongols, for us
would be that they became
Muslims, most of them
in the end--
converted to Islam
and then became--
after being these tremendously
destructive forces--
some of the greatest patrons
of the arts and letters
in all of Islamic history.
KINGSLEY:
The conversion, and its lasting
effect, was extraordinary.
Within a decade,
the Mongols had gone
from building towers
of human heads
to building mosques
glorifying God.
ATIL:
It is not surprising to me
that the land conquered
the conquerors.
The Mongols themselves
became Muslims
or Islamic leaders
par excellence.
KINGSLEY:
The Mongols transformed Islam.
Now Islamic power
could be held by anyone
not just the Arabs
who had created it.
The Mongols threw open the door
for the great
gunpowder empire to follow...
the empire of the Ottoman Turks.
Islam was now set
on a new course of expansion
to both the east and the west...
marching to the beat
of Turkish drums.
( shouts, gunfire )
In the conclusion
of Islam: Empire of Faith
an extraordinary power
rises out of Turkey--
the Ottomans, whose dreams of
conquest would not be denied.
Thus begins a centuries-long
campaign of expansion
driving the Ottomans
deep into the heart of Europe.